---
published: false
---
# 5 Digital Enterprise Architecture strategies to establish your company’s
competitive edge

## It’s no secret that Amazon, or some other digitally-adept organisation (but most
likely Amazon), will sooner or later attempt to take over your industry. Here’s
how to stay ahead of the curve.

Some time ago, I wrote [What is Digital Architecture
Anyway?](https://hackernoon.com/what-is-digital-architecture-anyway-47482189e3fc)
As a continuation of that article, also as apparently I am not very creative in
finding new topics, I would like to focus on **Digital **Enterprise Architecture
this time.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*wRaNDbgT7X2Bf5e-JCp5Iw.jpeg)

A Digital Enterprise Architecture is crucial, especially for large-size
enterprises to stay nimble amid increasing competition. It is no secret that
Amazon, or some other digital organisation, but most likely Amazon, will sooner
or later will attempt to take over your industry.

> Digital EA is essentially a modern approach to Enterprise Architecture, which
> appreciates the impacts of digital transformation and thrives to keep the
organisation ahead of the digital curve.

The previous article stated that Digital Architecture is an architecture
discipline applied to Solution Architecture. As would be expected, the same
logic applies to Digital EA.

Here are five ideas for establishing Digital Enterprise Architecture.

### 1. Disrupt Enterprise Architecture Principles

OK, disrupting might sound a bit ambitious. However, at a minimum, EA should
revise architecture principles, policies and standards to enable the adoption of
digital best practices and, more critically, emphasise customer centricity.

> Principles should not just focus on operational excellence as they would in
> traditional enterprise architecture. They should instead cherish returning,
happy customers.

In the digital age, businesses can only survive if they pay the same or more
attention to servicing their [existing customers as they do to acquiring new
customers](http://digitalmarketingmagazine.co.uk/customer-experience/return-on-experience-is-the-new-roi/3315).

In a Digital Enterprise Architecture, principles should be simple, practical and
concise with a sound understanding of the digital landscape. Principles should
emphasise customer and experience focus and inspire re-thinking. As a good
example, [Digital Principles](https://digitalprinciples.org/) provides a simple
set of principles with digital themes such as [Designing with the
User](https://digitalprinciples.org/principle/design-with-the-user/) and [Being
Data Driven](https://digitalprinciples.org/principle/be-data-driven/).

Also, in a Digital Enterprise Architecture, policies and standards appreciate
the changes in the architecture patterns. For instance, if there is a policy
against data replication, it may conflict in cases where persistent caching on
the edge layers is required, or a fully-autonomous microservice is to be
created. Keep in mind, even well-regarded museums are [updating their
principles](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qx_r-dP22Ps) to adapt to the digital
behaviours of today’s consumers.

### 2. Experience as Enterprise Architecture Asset

Key to digital is designing the right and optimum experiences for customers. In
order to model such experiences, organisations today use tools like [Customer
Personas, Customer Lifecycle and Journey
Maps](http://beyondthearc.com/blog/2014/customer-experience/improve-customer-experience-with-personas-and-journey-maps#sthash.ynuBiWXk.dpbs).
In a Digital EA, creation and re-use of these experience artifacts should be
considered a norm. In fact, [EA should provide an enterprise portfolio of
experience
assets](https://searchcio.techtarget.com/tip/Why-EA-should-take-the-lead-on-improving-customer-experience)
where projects and solution can utilise to assure all segments of customers and
lifecycle stages are considered.

> These enterprise level catalogue of customer personas, lifecycle stages and
> high-level [customer journey
maps](https://www.orbussoftware.com/blog/customer-journey-maps-in-the-ea-space/)
should then be used to derive other enterprise models where possible.

As an example, a business capabilities map should display critical capabilities
that are necessary to implement these journeys and capabilities impacted by
different customer personas and their lifecycle stages. This would allow help
organisations create capabilities that connect with the customers throughout
their lifecycle. Where experience artifacts cannot be directly used to derive
other EA models, they should at least be associated. For example, an application
catalogue linked to customer journeys would reveal critical applications for
customer satisfaction.

### 3. Experimenting with Lightweight Governance

Experimentation is an essential capability, especially for large-size
enterprises [where innovation is not that
great](https://www.forbes.com/sites/georgedeeb/2014/01/08/the-five-reasons-big-companies-struggle-with-innovation/#4bd926b62958).
Being able to test ideas before investing massively in them is the only way to
keep up with smaller size startups or with large-scale organisations who have
the resources and better at innovation. As Jeff Bezos correctly points out,
[ideas should only become expensive when they
work](https://www.cnbc.com/video/2018/09/19/amazons-bezos-says-you-cant-invent-without-experimenting.html).

Traditionally, Enterprise Architecture has the gate-keeping role in form of
policies and standards to maintain a sustainable
[technology](https://hackernoon.com/tagged/technology) ecosystem. While
governance is indispensable to eliminate unnecessary business and security
risks, strict policies may stonewall experimentation or let ideas become just
too expensive to try.

> Instead, a Digital Enterprise Architecture should promote experimentation
> through flexible governance models. Such models should allow business to test
their ideas without having to invest in a fully-ratified solution until the idea
proves itself to be profitable.

Thoughtful experimentation and investing in ideas is an essential capability,
especially for large organisations, to avoid falling behind the competition.
Although first-time-right might sound like a noble Enterprise Architecture
outcome, [you can’t pick the winners without investing in
losers](https://thinkgrowth.org/why-cant-nestle-produce-another-nespresso-e2aeb3a5e086).

### 4. Cultivate a Design-Driven Architecture

Embracing a [design](https://hackernoon.com/tagged/design)-driven, innovation
culture is crucial for today’s organisations. Focusing on operational excellence
no longer cuts it. Although it is not easy to quantify the value of design, the
Design Management Institute’s [Design Value
Index](https://www.dmi.org/page/DesignValue) is a strong indicator to quantify
the difference it makes. According to [2015’s Design Value
Index](https://www.dmi.org/page/2015DVIandOTW), design-centric companies
outperformed S&P 500 by 211% on returns over the 10 years between 2005 and 2015.

A design-driven architecture (I know, it sounds like “wood-driven carpentry”)
would be the key enabler of a design-centric company. In an article from 2017,
Gartner says [40% of enterprise architects will focus on the design-driven
architecture](https://www.gartner.com/smarterwithgartner/the-evolution-of-enterprise-architecture/)
where organisations understand the ecosystem and its actors, gaining insight
into them and their behaviour and developing and evolving the services they
need. In fact, Enterprise Architects, an Australian architecture consultancy
[re-branded itself as a Business Design
firm](http://www.fromhereon.com/about-us/#our-journey) 15 years after its
foundation.

In these circumstances, Enterprise Architecture should promote design thinking
within the organisation and in the architecture processes.

> It should also encourage, if not instruct, solution architects to spend time
> with the actual customers and participate in customer/user tests.

Here’s a bonus, [inspirational
interview](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GNjmCewxyo0) conducted by the London
Business School with Molly Dobson from Amazon on the culture of innovation.

### 5. Be Digital

Well, thank you Captain Obvious! But, seriously, you simply cannot have a
Digital Enterprise Architecture if your EA practice, or any of your architecture
practices for that matter, is not behaving digital.

> EA teams should re-think and re-design their services with the focus on their
> customers.

Are the organisation users getting the answers or guidance they require easily
and timely? Is your Enterprise Architecture relevant, down-to-earth or
disconnected? Are your artefacts easy to consume, or does it require
architecture knowledge or special tooling? Do people have to chase EAs for
critical decisions or are you proactive? Does your EA only speak about a far
away future state which is not helping solve today’s problems? Or is it only
outdated documentation of the current state? Most critically, are you a
gatekeeper or an enabler?

EA should also explore the opportunities to utilise technology to deliver better
experiences. An example would be an AI engine running on the architecture
repositories allowing users to intuitively query the architecture. Another
example would be using big data and machine learning to maintain a current
picture of the enterprise systems and the interactions between them.

—

Acting faster, bolder and smarter at the same time is imperative for today’s
businesses and it is exponentially harder for traditional organisations.
Enterprise Architecture can have a role in achieving one or all of these goals.
A Digital EA does not only focus on being smart and be the brakes when
necessary; it is also the engine driving the change and helping the organisation
take bolder steps.